1. As was shown in Chapter 8 Traits and comparative methods, neglecting the phylogenetic relatedness of individuals can lead to false conclusions about correlations between characters. By using Fisher's exact test directly only on the values of discrete traits, we assume that individuals are independent of each other. In reality, it is not a true story. Usually, we assume that individuals are related through evolutionary history, so the results of trait correlation might be quite the opposite. Now, our assumption will be only that evolution along the branches is independent, that is trustworthy.
2. To apply linear regression, we need to have independent identically distributed variables. For that reason, we build contrast variables as independent variables with identical variance.
3. From a mathematical perspective, we assumed that trait value evolves according to Brownian motion so that it is a Wiener process and thus it implies memorylessness. That means that X_k1 - X_l1 and X_k2 - X_l2  (where 0<=l1<=k1 < l2 <=k2) are independent. So, defining the contrast as Z_kl = Xk - X_l and considering the fact that they are calculated for parts of the tree that do not share common branches by definition, allow us to say, that it uses the memoryless property so that they are independent.
And normalization step ensures that the contrasts have identical variance.
4. If we apply the regression model directly to the tips values, in our case tips values are the length of canine teeth, and the length of claws, we might get they are highly correlated, but applying the independent contrast method might give a different result. It depends on the behavior of trait values along the tree.
If along the evolution traits changed together in proportional ways, they should show correlated contrasts.
5. Applying Fisher's exact test on tips values is much easier to accomplish since you need only to observe current species traits values, fill in the contingency table and calculate the respective probability. But when we want to dig deeper and apply the contrast strategy, we need to know all changes of traits in the tree, at least we need to know when the changes happened, so it is much harder to accomplish.