1. Since we have a symmetric situation for A and G nucleotides for 1st and 2d nodes and, so that we get the same values for likelihoods for A and G (0.002054 in node 7), then when we calculate the likelihood for node 6, we calculate multipliers from left and right branches, left branch gives us the same values as well because the symmetric, but the right gives the different ones, so the final likelihood for A and G are different as well. Let's dive deeper into why we get different values in the multiplier for the right branch. If we look at the Q matrix in the 3d column (because the 3d node is A, so we have (0, 0, 1, 0)), then we might notice that values [1, 3] and [2, 3] are the same, whereas [3, 3] and [3, 4] are different, the same behavior is for transition matrix P so that we will have different values for respective multipliers so that the resulting likelihood for G and A are different.
2. Since all calculation is symmetric in terms of right and left branches, so the numbers will be all the same and we can use all of them. The differences occur only in numerations.
3. 1) The maximum likelihood search is an NP-hard task since we need to go through all (or a lot if we use random walking) possible trees and search for the optimal one. Meanwhile, the UPGMA algorithm is a P-hard task with O(n^3).
2) UPGMA algorithm is based on distances between nodes (more deterministic approach) whereas maximum likelihood is based on probabilities (stochastic approach)
3) UPGMA algorithm may give not the best solution, whereas the maximum likelihood search should
4. In our implementation, we use a recursive approach without reusing previous values, so in that case, we need to recalculate one additional subtree completely and calculate the likelihood for one tip. So, roughly runtime will increase twice.
5. No, we cannot guarantee that. For the time-reversible substitution model, it is true as was shown in Paragraph 6 Phylogenetic tree, p 156. But we cannot do the same considering for not time reversible model, so choosing different places for root might change likelihood values.